# Particle Orbit Theory

Particle orbit theory studies the dynamics of a single charged particle in assigned electric and magnetic fields. This will be the context to which we will apply some of the numerical schemes discussed in the [Introduction to Computational Plasma Physics](./Intro_Comp_Plasma_Phys.md). Charged particle dynamics provides useful hints to understand the physical behaviour of a charged population, and, thus, of a plasma. In the following, we adopt a classical description (not relativistic or quantum) and suppose that the field behaviour is completely given, no attempt is made at self-consistency. More accurate and self-consistent treatment of electromagnetic fields and particle motion to include the currents and induced fields resulting from the flow of charges can be done numerically. 

The charged particle dynamics comes from solving the following ordinary differential equations:

$$\dfrac{d\mathbf{x}}{dt}= \mathbf{v}$$

$$m \dfrac{d\mathbf{v}}{dt}=q(\mathbf{E}+\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B})$$

In general, $\mathbf{B} = \mathbf{B}(\mathbf{x}, t)$ and $\mathbf{E} = \mathbf{E}(\mathbf{x}, t)$ are functions of three spatial dimensions and of time. Therefore, we have a set of coupled, non-linear, ordinary differential equations for the unknowns $v$ and $x$ as functions of $t$.

## $\mathbf{B}$ uniform and constant

The above differential equation reduces to:

$$ m \dfrac{d^2\mathbf{x}}{dt^2}=m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v}}{dt}=q(\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B})$$

We can start to derive useful information on the conserved quantities. Multiplying by $\cdot \mathbf{v}$ and by $\cdot \mathbf{B}$, we get:

$$\dfrac{dv^2}{dt}=0 \quad \mathbf{B}\cdot\dfrac{d\mathbf{v}}{dt} =0$$

The conclusion is that the kinetic energy of a particle in a static magnetic field is a constant.
In other words, a static magnetic field can do no work on a charged particle. Another basic
related result is that a static magnetic field produces no force parallel to B, a result that
follows trivially from the relation B · (v × B) = 0.
Let's define the component of the velocity parallel to the magnetic field as:

$$v_\parallel=\mathbf{v}\cdot\dfrac{\mathbf{B}}{B}$$

$v_\parallel$, $v^2$, and $v_{\perp}^2$ are constant during the particle motion. In practice, the kinetic particle energy remains constant because the Lorentz force is always perpendicular to the velocity and can
thus change only its direction, but not its magnitude. This suggests to use cylindrical coordinates. Introducing the **cyclotron frequency** $\omega_c=qB/m$:

$$\dfrac{dv_x}{dt}=\omega_c v_y \quad \dfrac{dv_y}{dt}=-\omega_c v_x \quad v_z=v_\parallel=const$$

which solved finally leads to

$$ x(t)=x_c+\rho_L \sin(\omega t+ \phi_0) \quad y(t)=y_c+\rho_L \cos(\omega t+ \phi_0)$$

where $(x_c,y_c)$ is called guiding center or Larmor centre, and $\rho_L=v_\perp/\omega_c$ is the larmor radius. The solutions describe a circular uniform motion in the $x-y$ plane characterized by the Larmor radius while along the direction of the $\mathbf{B}$ field the motion is uniform. The sign of the charge decides on the direction of the circular motion. The motion is called cyclotron motion. The motion is analogous to a current flowing in a coil and produces a magnetic field opposite to the imposed $\mathbf{B}$ (diamagnetic behaviour). 

The fastest and dominant behavior corresponds to gyro motion in which particles
move freely along magnetic field lines and rotate in small circular orbits perpendicular to
the magnetic field.

The center of the orbit is located at xg , yg and hence

The next contribution to the hierarchy of frequencies involves slow spatial and time
variations in the fields, which lead to important modifications of the basic gyro motion.
This regime is known as “guiding center motion.”

The orbit of such a particle exhibits good
confinement perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic field and no confinement parallel
to the magnetic field.

the magnetic field generated by
the electric current of a gyrating particle always opposes the applied magnetic field; that is,
the gyro motion is diamagnetic.

Note that the gyro frequency
increases with the magnetic field B: high B → high ωc . Also the electron gyro frequency is
much larger than the ion gyro frequency by the ratio m i /m e . The gyro radius increases with
the perpendicular velocity v⊥ and decreases as the magnetic field B increases: high v⊥ , low
B→ large rL .

Second,
these drifts are largely responsible for the currents that flow in the plasma and are therefore
essential for the ultimate development of self-consistent models. like in fusion devices

The main conclusion from this chapter is that a magnetic field can quite effectively
confine charged particles in the perpendicular direction.


## $\mathbf{B}$ and $\mathbf{F}$ uniform and constant

In this case, we have an additional force $\mathbf{F}$ of arbitrary orientation that could be the result of a constant electric field applied to the charge. The equation of motion now is:

$$m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v}}{dt}=q(\mathbf{v}\times\mathbf{B})+\mathbf{F}$$

We decompose this equation considering different components:

$$m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v}_\parallel}{dt}=\mathbf{F} _\parallel \quad m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v} _ \perp'}{dt}=q(\mathbf{v} _\perp'\times\mathbf{B}) \quad m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v} _{\perp c}}{dt}=q(\mathbf{v} _{\perp c}\times\mathbf{B})+\mathbf{F}$$

where $\mathbf{v}_\perp=\mathbf{v} _ \perp'+\mathbf{v} _{\perp c}$ so a component follows the circular motion described above while the other is the velocity of the guiding center that now might also move.

We want to find a stationary solution for the guiding center if possible, by imposing that the time derivative of $\mathbf{v} _{\perp c}$ is zero:

$$\mathbf{v} _{\perp c} = \dfrac{\mathbf{F} _\perp \times \mathbf{B}} {q B^2}$$
Thus, one sees that any force with a component perpendic-
ular to B causes a particle to drift perpendicular to both F
and B.
constant acceleration
due to the parallel electric field

This equation represents a **drift of the guiding center** orthogonal both to $\mathbf{F} _\perp$ and $\mathbf{B}$. The larmor radius in this case changes based on the position of the particle. If $\mathbf{F}=q\mathbf{E}$ the guiding center drift is called ExB drift and is independent of the particle kind:

$$\mathbf{v} _{\perp c} =\mathbf{v}_E= \dfrac{\mathbf{E} \times \mathbf{B}} {B^2}$$

An example is the drift due to a constant gravitational
force Fg = mg perpendicular to the magnetic field. The re-
sulting drift velocity, vg = mg/qB, is in opposite directions
for electrons and ions (see Fig. 3). However, in laboratory plasmas vg is far to small to
be of importance (2 × 10−8m/s in a magnetic field B = 5 T). does not depend on the sign of the charge or the particles. It
is also independent of the particle mass and therefore iden-
tical for ions and electrons.

It is also independent of the mass and charge. In other
words, electrons and ions drift with the same velocity.

## $\mathbf{B}$ and $\mathbf{E}$ non-uniform and non-constant

By following the velocity and position of the guiding center for more general
fields one obtains an accurate picture of the average particle location, differing from the
exact orbit by only a small deviation of order of the gyro radius

that the fields vary slowly in space with respect to the gyro radius and slowly in time
with respect to the inverse gyro frequency. to understand
particle confinement

Let's start from defining spatial and temporal scales of variation of the system:

$$ L_\parallel= \left|\dfrac{\nabla_\parallel B}{B}\right|^{-1} \quad L_\perp= \left|\dfrac{\nabla_\perp B}{B}\right|^{-1} \quad T_B=\dfrac{1}{B} \dfrac{\partial B}{\partial t}$$

If $L_\parallel$ is much larger than the step of the helical motion $v_\parallel 2\pi/\omega_c$ (space transversed in one period of cyclotron motion in the direction parallel to $\mathbf{B}$), if $L_\perp$ is much larger than the Larmor radius, and if $T_B$, the variation f $B$ in time is much smaller than $\omega_c$, we can say that the particle will act as if the magnetic field is locally constant with the guiding center moving along the field lines. Therefore the variation of $\mathbf{B}$ is treated as an higher order correction. This is the guiding center approximation, proven valid in many cases of practical interest.
The analysis has shown that the perpendicular particle motion can be decomposed into
two components: the fast gyro motion and the slower guiding center motion comprising
primarily the guiding center drifts.
We decouple the motion in the following way:

$$ \mathbf{x}=\mathbf{x}_c+\mathbf{x}' \quad \mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v}_c+\mathbf{v}' $$

where $x'\ll x_c$. Now we can expand the magnetic field around the guiding center position and by averaging over the cyclotron period we can derive the equation for the guiding center:

$$m\dfrac{d\mathbf{v}_c}{dt}=q[\mathbf{v}_c\times\mathbf{B}(\mathbf{x}_c)]-\mu\nabla B(\mathbf{x}_c)+q\mathbf{E}(\mathbf{x}_c)$$

where $\mu=\langle 1/2 m v_\perp^2\rangle/B(\mathbf{x}_c)$ is the local average moment associated to the cyclotron motion. Instead, $\mathbf{v}'$ is described by the cyclotron motion around the guiding center.

A further decomposition of $\mathbf{x}_c$ in components parallel and perpendicular to  the magnetic field and imposing stationary behaviour we can found all the drifts to which the guiding center is subject in this case of non-uniform magnetic field. Here is the list of drifts and their meaning:

* **$\nabla B$ drift**The other inhomogeneity that results in a drift is the
transverse gradient of the magnetic field strength. The parti-
cle orbit has a smaller radius of curvature on that part of its
orbit located in the stronger magnetic field. This leads to a
drift perpendicular to both the magnetic field and its gradi-
ent.
  $$\mathbf{x}_{\perp c}=-\dfrac{c\mu}{qB^2}\nabla B \times \mathbf{B}$$

* **inertial drift**: due to curvature of the magnetic field lines
  $$\mathbf{x}_{\perp c}=-\dfrac{mc}{qB^2} \mathbf{F}_c \times \mathbf{B}$$
  where $\mathbf{F}_c$ is the centrifugal force felt by the particle

* **polarization drift**: ExB drift is not constant if the elctric field depends on time depends
on the charge and the mass of the particle.
  $$\mathbf{x}_{\perp c}=-\dfrac{m}{qB^2} \dfrac{d\mathbf{E} _\perp}{dt}$$

## Bibliography

* Freidberg, J. P. (2008). Plasma Physics and Fusion Energy. (n.p.): Cambridge University Press. Chapter 8.

















